Hello everyone and welcome to the lecture on if else an ELSE IF statements.
It's finally time start learning how we can add even more logic into our programming using our in this
video will quickly show the syntax for an IF ELSE an ELSE IF statement.
If you're already familiar with programming and if an else and LCF statements so you can just get an
idea of what the syntax looks like for this and are after that will actually explain how to use if Elsin
else if statements in your code.
If you're new to programming Let's go ahead and jump to our studio and see how this all works.
OK so here we are now at our studio.
I'm going to quickly go over the syntax in case you're already familiar of programming and just want
a brief reminder how to do this sort of thing and are in are you just going to say if in parentheses
you're going to pass in that condition.
So for example let's say we want to check x x is equal to a certain number.
We check for equality like that.
Put your conditional statement inside of the parentheses and then in curly brackets you're going to
have whatever code you want to execute.
For example you can print the statements just a string x is equal to 10.
Let's go ahead and set this to run.
I'll say X assign it to 10.
Now let's just go ahead and run that source.
Notice we get the print out.
Now if you want to add if statements you can just do that on the end of these curly brackets.
Some other condition here.
Effects let's say is equal to 12.
We'll say prints X equal to 12.
And finally we can add L statement which will just go ahead and put in curly brackets there.
Since we're not checking for any particular condition we're just saying else here will say prints X
was not equal to 10 or 12.
Let's go ahead and make X equal or assign 12 to X..
Make sure that all works out will say it's x is equal to 12 and Al to assign it 13 x is not equal to
10 or 12.
OK so if you're already familiar of programming Hopefully that's enough for you to just catch up on
the syntax.
It's pretty straightforward and simple.
You've already seen this kind of thing before in another language.
It's just your.
If else if and L statements your conditions inside parentheses your code to execute inside curly brackets
.
Now let's go ahead and backtrack a bit in case you've never seen.
If Else elses statements why we use them and how it can use them and are in order to see a good example
of why we can use these.
Let's start off with creating some variables.
I'm going to create a variable called hot and then assign at the logical false going to create another
variable temp and assign it the number 60.
So temperature 60 degrees in this case and I'm going to create an if statement.
What if is going to allow us to do is say if some condition is true then execute the code inside of
this curly brackets.
So for example if we'll put in print CS if temp greater than 80 curly brackets.
And this is we're going to put some code to execute if condition was true.
So that means if the condition inside those princes is true the code inside of these curly brackets
is going to execute in this case.
I'll just put a simple print statement will say print temperature temp.
All just say temp is greater than 80.
If I run this right now no I don't get any output and that's because my temperature was equal to 60
.
If I make this equal to 100 and run the source then I get temp is greater than 80 so that makes sense
Now your code inside of this curly brackets isn't just limited to print statements.
We can even do things like re-assigning or for loops.
Those kind of things all inside of your curly brackets.
So for example I'm going to reassign hot to be true only if the temperature is greater than 80.
So outside of this if statement I'm going to go ahead and prints pots and check if it got turned to
true since her temperature is 100 degrees.
So in this case it is true.
Going to go ahead and clear the console and change temperature to 10 degrees.
Read this again.
Notice temperature or hot is not equal to false because we assign hot hot equal to false set temperature
to 10.
And this is statement because the temperature was never greater than 80.
We never actually execute the code inside of the curly brackets.
Something to keep in mind while you're working with.
If Elsin elses statements is that you should try to format your code so you can easily read it when
you come back to it later on.
The bracket notation and the Prince's notation actually allows us to write and indent this code.
However we want so for a imagine we could have actually done something that looks like this end it will
still run with no problems in other languages such as Python.
Indentation is key to actually being able to execute your code here because of the curly brackets and
the princes.
It can be a little sloppy for code.
Now that may lead to bad coding practices as far as formatting your code.
So keep it in mind and try to always let our studio pick your parentheses placements or your curly bracket
placements.
Notice here this curly bracket the closing one lined up with the if statement which is nice.
Now let's imagine we want to actually execute another block of code that occurs if the if statement
isn't true meaning it's false because actually is an else statement as kind of a catchall for a bunch
of if conditions that are true.
We'll just put an L statement and go ahead and get rid of hot to make this a little more clear.
We'll get rid of this last print statement and we'll get ahead.
Get rid of hot here.
So I'm going to go ahead is that temp equal to let's say 30 degrees and I'll say if temp is greater
than 80 I will go ahead imprints hot outside.
Now if I if that's not true I want to actually execute some code in this case I can use.
Else I'll put in some curly brackets and then add another print statement.
So I'll end up writing here is I will just say Prince
Tim is not greater than 80.
OK so if we go ahead and run this code we'll go in and clear the consul and run the code here.
Note we get temp is not greater than 80.
So because this if statement wasn't true then we had the else block of code execute and you line up
your ELSE block with the closing bracket or curly bracket of the parents if statement that you're referring
to when you say L's so we say if this is true execute this code block otherwise.
Or else print this statement.
Now the question arises What if we wanted more options to check for other than just if Or else that's
where we can use the else if statement to add a multiple condition checks.
And then finally we'll use else at the end to execute code.
If none are conditions actually match up.
Let's go ahead and see this in action.
I'm going to go ahead and expand this.
We're going to add some more lines of code here.
They go in and delete line 1 get as much room we can.
So I'll say if temp greater than 80 We're going to go ahead and say grant that it's hot outside let
me go ahead and delete this Else line for now and I'll say ELSE IF and another condition and this condition
I'm going to go ahead and pasan let's say temp less than 80 and Tim greater than 50 will actually go
ahead and say equals.
So if the temp is less than or equal to 80 or the temp and this attempt is greater than or equal to
50 which is basically just to check if the temperature is between 80 degrees and 50 degrees inclusive
then we have some curly brackets and I'm going to execute some code here or go ahead and just say print
nice outside.
We'll just have some arbitrary nice outside if it's the weather.
2015 80 degrees.
So now we have a check.
If the temperature is greater than 80 degrees we're going to go ahead and say it's hot outside.
Else if the temperatures in between 50 degrees and 80 degrees will print nice outside.
And what I'm going to go ahead and do is just add an else statement which is going to be a catchall
if that's not the case.
And then I'm going to go ahead and print.
It's less than 50 degrees outside so why am I able to print that.
Well I know that if this statement wasn't true temperature great in the 80 degrees.
And if these two statements weren't true equals or less than 80 greater than or equal to 50 then it's
going to have to be less than 50 degrees outside in order for this statement to print.
So let's go ahead and run this code
and notice we get it's less than 50 degrees outside.
When I set the temperature to 30 if I go ahead and set the temperature to 100 I should see hot outside
run it.
We do get hot outside and let's go ahead and have a nice day.
75 degrees.
Run the code and it's nice outside.
Great.
So that's how you can use an if else if an else statement in order to run your code with multiple conditional
statements and you can actually keep tacking on.
Else if statements.
So for example let's say you wanted to have some sort of print statement if the temperature was exactly
45 degrees.
We can go ahead and add that in like this will say.
Else if it's an equal to 45 Crantz
exactly 45 degrees outside and then let's go ahead and put our statement back there.
Now notice that if it's 45 degrees outside this will Prince this LCF of temp equal to 45 degrees but
this L statement will no longer print.
So this isn't exactly true anymore I would say it's less than 50 degrees outside and it's not exactly
45 degrees.
In order for that print statement to make sense let's go ahead and try running this with the sequel
to 45 and boom we have exactly 45 degrees outside the splaying and our consul.
OK.
So those are the basic ways of using if else if and L statements in your code.
Let's go ahead and just walk through one final simple example in order to fully understand how to use
these statements and to go ahead and clear everything here and to go in and clear the consul and begin
again.
Let's go ahead and say imagine we're running a store and we have two items for sale.
We have ham and cheese for sale.
We'll go ahead and say we sold 10 items of ham and that we sold 10 packages of cheese.
And then finally we also have a report that we're going to send to our headquarters whoever is running
the store.
And right now the report is blank and we're going to use conditional state or these if statements along
with some conditions inside of them to send back a report will say if Hahm is greater than 10 and cheese
is greater than or equal to 10
we'll sign a report to be the strong strong sales of both ham and cheese.
So just a silly example but briefly just reiterate you can use the if statements.
Now if we don't have strong sales of ham and cheese we'll go ahead and put an else if.
So I'll say Elspeth ambs equal to zero.
And cheese is equal to zero.
We'll assign a report to no sales today.
And then finally going to have an L statements that just has clearly brackets here.
Remember for those statements we don't put in the actual parentheses because else it's just a catchall
.
If none of these are actually true then finally we have some else block of code to execute.
So we're not actually going to check for a condition on else which is why else goes directly to curly
brackets.
So USA else reports and assign it we sold something today
because the first one checks if we had really strong sales.
The second one checks we've had no sales.
Otherwise we know we sold something.
Let's go ahead and finally after all this is done print our report that we're going to send back to
HQ.
So we should have some sales today.
We go ahead and run this.
Notice that we had actually will go ahead and say strong sales both ham and cheese since we're checking
for equality or greater than of ham and cheese 10.
We go ahead and change these to let's say 5 and 5 and run this code.
We sold something today if we didn't sell ham or cheese today.
So 00 run this code.
No sale say OK this is still a relatively simple example and it can be expanded upon right now.
We just want to show how we can use if.
Else in LCF along with some logical operators and slowly we're going to build up more complex tasks
as this course progresses.
Okay.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture